---
id: ex18
title: Exercise 18
---

:::info
This is an in-class exercise. An exercise page like this one will contain a brief description but is intended to be supplemented by discussion during our meeting time. Complete the exercise to the best of your ability in the time given. Feel free to talk with other students as you work, and do not be afraid to ask questions if you get stuck. Aim to complete as much as possible during our meeting, and submit on Gradescope to check your solution. You are encouraged to work at home to complete what you do not get through today, and ask questions over Piazza or in office hours.
:::


:::tip Learning Objectives
Reinforces concepts learned in today meeting:
* C++ basics: I/O using iostream library, how to compile/link/execute
* Using the C++ Standard Template Library (std::vector)
* Recursion
:::

:::danger Task
Complete the implementation of code which read a target count from the standard input, generates a `std::vector` with that many random values, sorts them, and then validates that the result is in fact sorted.
:::

### Part 1
Get started by running `git pull` to update your clone of the public repository, and then copying the `exercises/ex18` directory into your personal git repository. You'll see that we have provided a file named `sort.cpp`.


### Part 2
In the supplied file, `sort.cpp`, read an integer from the standard input into `count`.

### Part 3
Modify the `vec` array so that it stores `count` random values.

### Part 4
First, compile and link `sort.cpp` by typing:

```bash
g++ -std=c++11 -Wall -Wextra -pedantic sort.cpp -o sort
```
Next, run the executable `sort`, specify that the vector `vec` should have 50 values, and confirm that this causes an assertion failure (because the random numbers are not sorted), either by typing:

```bash
echo 50 | ./sort
```

or by calling the function:

```bash
./sort
```
and then entering the value `50` at the prompt.

### Part 5
Define the `sort` function so that implements the [merge sort](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Merge_sort) algorithm.

:::tip
The merge sort algorithm is a recursive algorithm for sorting a set of values. It splits a set of values into two, sorts each of the two subsets independently, and then merges the two sorted subsets into a single sorted set.
:::
